Fix: Enrich instructions for string functions FORMAT() and FROM_BASE64() (#15487) (#16085)
pingcap/docs: functions-and-operators/string-functions.md

### [`FORMAT()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/string-functions.html#function_format)

The `FORMAT(X,D[,locale])` function is used to format the number `X` to a format similar to `"#,###,###. ##"`, rounded to `D` decimal places, and return the result as a string.

Arguments:

- `X`: the number to be formatted. It can be a direct numeric value, a numeric string, or a number in scientific notation.
- `D`: the number of decimal places for the returned value. The function rounds the number `X` to `D` decimal places. If `D` is greater than the actual number of decimal places in `X`, the result is padded with zeros to the corresponding length.

>  `[locale]`: specifies a locale setting to be used for grouping between decimal points, thousands separators, and separators for resultant numbers. A valid locale value is the same as the valid value of the [`lc_time_names`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.3/en/server-system-variables.html#sysvar_lc_time_names) system variable. If not specified or the region setting is `NULL`, the `'en_US'` region setting is used by default. This parameter is optional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 `[locale]`: specifies a locale setting to be used for grouping between decimal points, thousands separators, and separators for resultant numbers. A valid locale value is the same as the valid value of the [`lc_time_names`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.3/en/server-system-variables.html#sysvar_lc_time_names) system variable. If not specified or the region setting is `NULL`, the `'en_US'` region setting is used by default. This argument is optional.
```

- If the first argument is a number represented in scientific notation (using `E/e`), the function returns the result based on that number. For example, `FORMAT('1E2', 3)` returns `100.000`.
- If the first argument is a string starting with non-numeric characters, the function returns zero and a warning `(Code 1292)`. For example, `FORMAT('q12.36', 5)` returns `0.00000`, but also includes a warning `Warning (Code 1292): Truncated incorrect DOUBLE value: 'q12.36'`.
- If the first argument is a string mixing numbers and non-numbers, the function returns a result based on the consecutive numeric part at the beginning of the argument, and also includes a warning `(Code 1292)`. For example, `FORMAT('12.36q56.78', 1)` returns the same numeric result as `FORMAT('12.36', 1)`, but includes a warning `Warning (Code 1292): Truncated incorrect DOUBLE value: '12.36q56.78'`.
- If the second argument is zero or a negative number, the function truncates the decimal part and returns an integer.
- If any of the arguments is `NULL`, the function returns `NULL`.

Examples:

> The following example shows how to format the number 12.36 to different decimal places:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following examples show how to format the number 12.36 to different decimal places:
```

### [`FORMAT()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/string-functions.html#function_format)

The `FORMAT()` function is used to round numbers and format them to a specified number of decimal places, returning a number formatted to the specified decimal places.

The function rounds and formats based on the specified number of decimal places. If the specified number of decimal places is greater than the actual number of decimal places in the number, the result is padded with zeros to the corresponding length.

**Parameters:**

> 1. **Number (or Numeric String):** The number to be formatted. It can be a direct numeric value, a numeric string, or a number in scientific notation.
> 2. **Decimal Places:** The specified number of decimal places for the returned value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Number (or Numeric String):** The number to be formatted. It can be a direct numeric value, a numeric string, or a number in scientific notation.
- **Decimal Places:** The specified number of decimal places for the returned value.
```

> 

Reviewer: 上面小节内容和中文不同，需要和中文保持一致吗？

Author: 谢谢提醒！我这边还没来得及更新和同步两边的翻译

**Behavior Details:**

> - If the first input parameter is a string and contains only digits, the function will return a result based on that number. For example, `FORMAT('12.34', 1)` and `FORMAT(12.34, 1)` yield the same result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the first input parameter is a string and contains only digits, the function returns a result based on that number. For example, `FORMAT('12.34', 1)` and `FORMAT(12.34, 1)` return the same result.
```

- If the first input parameter is a number represented in scientific notation (using `E/e`), the function returns the result based on that number. For example, `FORMAT('1E2', 3)` returns `100.000`.
- If the first input parameter is a string starting with non-numeric characters, the function returns zero and a warning `(Code 1292)`. For example, `FORMAT('q12.36', 5)` returns `0.00000`, but also includes a warning `Warning (Code 1292): Truncated incorrect DOUBLE value: 'q12.36'`.

> - If the first input parameter is a string mixing numbers and non-numbers, the function returns results based on the consecutive numeric part at the beginning of the parameter, and also issues a warning `(Code 1292)`. For example, `FORMAT('12.36q56.78', 1)` yields the same numeric result as `FORMAT('12.36', 1)`, but also includes a warning `Warning (Code 1292): Truncated incorrect DOUBLE value: '12.36q56.78'`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the first input parameter is a string mixing a number and a non-number, the function returns a result based on the consecutive numeric part at the beginning of the parameter, and also includes a warning `(Code 1292)`. For example, `FORMAT('12.36q56.78', 1)` returns the same numeric result as `FORMAT('12.36', 1)`, but includes a warning `Warning (Code 1292): Truncated incorrect DOUBLE value: '12.36q56.78'`.
```

- If the second input parameter is negative, the function truncates the decimal part and returns an integer.
- If any of the input parameters is `NULL`, the function returns `NULL`.

**Examples:**

Formatting the number 12.36 to different decimal places:

```sql
mysql> SELECT FORMAT(12.36, 1);
+------------------+
| FORMAT(12.36, 1) |
+------------------+
| 12.4             |
+------------------+
```

```sql
mysql> SELECT FORMAT(12.36, 5);
+------------------+
| FORMAT(12.36, 5) |
+------------------+
| 12.36000         |
+------------------+
```

```sql
mysql> SELECT FORMAT(12.36, 2);
+------------------+
| FORMAT(12.36, 2) |
+------------------+
| 12.36            |
+------------------+
```

### [`FROM_BASE64()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/string-functions.html#function_from-base64)

The `FROM_BASE64()` function is used to decode strings represented in [Base64](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4648) and returns a string in its hexadecimal form.

> - This function accepts a single argument: the Base64 encoded string to be decoded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This function accepts a single argument, that is, the Base64 encoded string to be decoded.
```

- If the input parameter is not a valid Base64 encoded string, the `FROM_BASE64()` function will return `NULL`.

> **Note:**
>
> The `FROM_BASE64()` function only processes valid Base64 encoded strings.

> **Example:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example
```

> Decode the Base64 encoded string `'SGVsbG8gVGlEQg=='` (This string is the result of encoding `'Hello TiDB'`, which can be done using the [`TO_BASE64()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/string-functions.html#function_to-base64) function.).

Reviewer 3: I think this should link to the `TO_BASE64()` description in the same document.

```suggestion
Decode the Base64 encoded string `'SGVsbG8gVGlEQg=='` (This string is the result of encoding `'Hello TiDB'`, which can be done using the [`TO_BASE64()`](#function_to-base64).
```

Author: Thank you for your suggestion. I had initially planned to write following the Markdown format. However, I noticed that in the current document, other titles are formatted as links. I followed the existing document format to maintain consistency.

https://github.com/pingcap/docs/blob/b5aedca6fdb4389f9a4e10e36606803354752d3e/functions-and-operators/string-functions.md?plain=1#L304

> Decode the Base64 encoded string `'SGVsbG8gVGlEQg=='` (This string is the result of encoding `'Hello TiDB'`, which can be done using the [`TO_BASE64()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/string-functions.html#function_to-base64) function.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to decode the Base64 encoded string `'SGVsbG8gVGlEQg=='`. This string is the result of encoding `'Hello TiDB'`, which can be done using the [`TO_BASE64()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/string-functions.html#function_to-base64) function.
```

```sql
mysql> SELECT TO_BASE64('Hello TiDB');
+-------------------------+
| TO_BASE64('Hello TiDB') |
+-------------------------+
| SGVsbG8gVGlEQg==        |
+-------------------------+

mysql> SELECT FROM_BASE64('SGVsbG8gVGlEQg==');
+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| FROM_BASE64('SGVsbG8gVGlEQg==')                                  |
+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 0x48656C6C6F2054694442                                           |
+------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

```sql
mysql> SELECT CONVERT(FROM_BASE64('SGVsbG8gVGlEQg==') USING utf8mb4);
+--------------------------------------------------------+
| CONVERT(FROM_BASE64('SGVsbG8gVGlEQg==') USING utf8mb4) |
+--------------------------------------------------------+
| Hello TiDB                                             |
+--------------------------------------------------------+
```

> Decode the Base64 encoded number `MTIzNDU2` (This string is the result of encoding `123456`, which can be done using the [`TO_BASE64()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/string-functions.html#function_to-base64) function.).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Decode the Base64 encoded number `MTIzNDU2` (This string is the result of encoding `123456`, which can be done using the [`TO_BASE64()`](#function_to-base64).
```

### [`FORMAT()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/string-functions.html#function_format)

> The `FORMAT()` function is used to round numbers and format them to a specified number of decimal places, returning a number formatted to the specified decimal places.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `FORMAT(X,D[,locale])` function is used to format the number X rounded to a format similar to "#,###,###. ##",  retaining D decimal places, and returning the result as a string.
```

The function rounds and formats based on the specified number of decimal places. If the specified number of decimal places is greater than the actual number of decimal places in the number, the result is padded with zeros to the corresponding length.

#### Parameters

> - **Number (or Numeric String):** The number to be formatted. It can be a direct numeric value, a numeric string, or a number in scientific notation.
> - **Decimal Places:** The specified number of decimal places for the returned value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `X`: the number to be formatted. It can be a direct numeric value, a numeric string, or a number in scientific notation.
- `D`: the specified number of decimal places for the returned value.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 `[locale]`: specifies a locale setting to be used for grouping between decimal points, thousands separators, and separators for resultant numbers. The valid locale setting value is the same as the valid value of the [`lc_time_names`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.3/en/server-system-variables.html#sysvar_lc_time_names) system variable. If not specified or the region setting is `NULL`, the `'en_US'` region setting is used by default. This parameter is optional.
```

> #### Behavior details

Reviewer: ```suggestion

#### Behavior details
```

### [`FORMAT()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/string-functions.html#function_format)

The `FORMAT(X,D[,locale])` function is used to format the number X rounded to a format similar to "#,###,###. ##", retaining D decimal places, and returning the result as a string.

> The function rounds and formats based on the specified number of decimal places. If the specified number of decimal places is greater than the actual number of decimal places in the number, the result is padded with zeros to the corresponding length.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: moved it to https://github.com/pingcap/docs/pull/16085/files#r1472347044 as it is more relevant there

> #### Parameters

Reviewer 2: Argument is used in this Sting function doc https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/string-functions for input parameters

- `X`: the number to be formatted. It can be a direct numeric value, a numeric string, or a number in scientific notation.

> - `D`: the specified number of decimal places for the returned value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `D`: the number of decimal places for the returned value. The function rounds `X` to `D` decimal places. If `D` is greater than the actual number of decimal places in `X`, the result is padded with zeros to the corresponding length.
```

 `[locale]`: specifies a locale setting to be used for grouping between decimal points, thousands separators, and separators for resultant numbers. A valid locale value is the same as the valid value of the [`lc_time_names`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.3/en/server-system-variables.html#sysvar_lc_time_names) system variable. If not specified or the region setting is `NULL`, the `'en_US'` region setting is used by default. This parameter is optional.

#### Behavior details

> - If the first input parameter is a string and contains only digits, the function returns a result based on that number. For example, `FORMAT('12.34', 1)` and `FORMAT(12.34, 1)` return the same result.
> - If the first input parameter is a number represented in scientific notation (using `E/e`), the function returns the result based on that number. For example, `FORMAT('1E2', 3)` returns `100.000`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If the first argument is a string and contains only numbers, the function returns a result based on that numeric value. For example, `FORMAT('12.34', 1)` and `FORMAT(12.34, 1)` return the same result.
- If the first argument is a number represented in scientific notation (using `E/e`), the function returns the result based on that number. For example, `FORMAT('1E2', 3)` returns `100.000`.
```

> - If the first input parameter is a string starting with non-numeric characters, the function returns zero and a warning `(Code 1292)`. For example, `FORMAT('q12.36', 5)` returns `0.00000`, but also includes a warning `Warning (Code 1292): Truncated incorrect DOUBLE value: 'q12.36'`.
> - If the first input parameter is a string mixing a number and a non-number, the function returns a result based on the consecutive numeric part at the beginning of the parameter, and also includes a warning `(Code 1292)`. For example, `FORMAT('12.36q56.78', 1)` returns the same numeric result as `FORMAT('12.36', 1)`, but includes a warning `Warning (Code 1292): Truncated incorrect DOUBLE value: '12.36q56.78'`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If the first argument is a string starting with non-numeric characters, the function returns zero and a warning `(Code 1292)`. For example, `FORMAT('q12.36', 5)` returns `0.00000`, but also includes a warning `Warning (Code 1292): Truncated incorrect DOUBLE value: 'q12.36'`.
- If the first argument is a string mixing numbers and non-numbers, the function returns a result based on the consecutive numeric part at the beginning of the argument, and also includes a warning `(Code 1292)`. For example, `FORMAT('12.36q56.78', 1)` returns the same numeric result as `FORMAT('12.36', 1)`, but includes a warning `Warning (Code 1292): Truncated incorrect DOUBLE value: '12.36q56.78'`.
```

> - If the second input parameter is zero, the function truncates the decimal part and returns an integer.
> - If the second input parameter is a negative number, the function truncates the decimal part and returns an integer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If the second argument is zero or a negative number, the function truncates the decimal part and returns an integer.
```

> - If any of the input parameters is `NULL`, the function returns `NULL`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If any of the arguments is `NULL`, the function returns `NULL`.
```

#### Examples

The following example shows how to format the number 12.36 to different decimal places:

```sql
mysql> SELECT FORMAT(12.36, 1);
+------------------+
| FORMAT(12.36, 1) |
+------------------+
| 12.4             |
+------------------+
```

```sql
mysql> SELECT FORMAT(12.36, 5);
+------------------+
| FORMAT(12.36, 5) |
+------------------+
| 12.36000         |
+------------------+
```

```sql
mysql> SELECT FORMAT(12.36, 2);
+------------------+
| FORMAT(12.36, 2) |
+------------------+
| 12.36            |
+------------------+
```

### [`FROM_BASE64()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/string-functions.html#function_from-base64)

> The `FROM_BASE64()` function is used to decode strings represented in [Base64](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4648) and returns a string in its hexadecimal form.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `FROM_BASE64()` function is used to decode a [Base64](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4648) encoded string and returns the decoded result in its hexadecimal form.
```

- This function accepts a single argument, that is, the Base64 encoded string to be decoded.

> - If the input parameter is not a valid Base64 encoded string, the `FROM_BASE64()` function will return `NULL`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If the argument is `NULL` or not a valid Base64 encoded string, the `FROM_BASE64()` function returns `NULL`.
```

> > **Note:**
> >
> > The `FROM_BASE64()` function only processes valid Base64 encoded strings.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> #### Example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Examples
```

> The following example shows how to decode the Base64 encoded string `'SGVsbG8gVGlEQg=='`. This string is the result of encoding `'Hello TiDB'`, which can be done using the [`TO_BASE64()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/string-functions.html#function_to-base64) function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to decode the Base64 encoded string `'SGVsbG8gVGlEQg=='`. This string is the result of encoding `'Hello TiDB'`, using the [`TO_BASE64()`](#to_base64) function.
```

```sql
mysql> SELECT TO_BASE64('Hello TiDB');
+-------------------------+
| TO_BASE64('Hello TiDB') |
+-------------------------+
| SGVsbG8gVGlEQg==        |
+-------------------------+

mysql> SELECT FROM_BASE64('SGVsbG8gVGlEQg==');
+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| FROM_BASE64('SGVsbG8gVGlEQg==')                                  |
+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 0x48656C6C6F2054694442                                           |
+------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

```sql
mysql> SELECT CONVERT(FROM_BASE64('SGVsbG8gVGlEQg==') USING utf8mb4);
+--------------------------------------------------------+
| CONVERT(FROM_BASE64('SGVsbG8gVGlEQg==') USING utf8mb4) |
+--------------------------------------------------------+
| Hello TiDB                                             |
+--------------------------------------------------------+
```

> The following example shows how to decode the Base64 encoded number `MTIzNDU2`. This string is the result of encoding `123456`, which can be done using the [`TO_BASE64()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/string-functions.html#function_to-base64) function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to decode the Base64 encoded number `MTIzNDU2`. This string is the result of encoding `123456`, which can be done using the [`TO_BASE64()`](#to_base64) function.
```

### [`FORMAT()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/string-functions.html#function_format)

The `FORMAT()` function is used to format a number to a specified number of decimal places, returning a number formatted to the specified decimal places.

The function formats according to the specified number of decimal places. If the specified number of decimal places is greater than the actual number of decimal places in the number, the result will be padded with zeros to the corresponding length.

- This function accepts two parameters: the number to be formatted and the number of decimal places.
- If the first input parameter is a string and contains only digits, the function will return a result based on that number. For example, `FORMAT('12.34', 1)` and `FORMAT(12.34, 1)` yield the same result.

> - If the first input parameter is a string and the first character of the string is not a digit (e.g., `FORMAT('q12.34', 5)`), the function returns `0.00000`.

Reviewer 3: Besides returning a zero value it also returns a warning:
```
mysql> SELECT FORMAT('q12.34', 5);
+---------------------+
| FORMAT('q12.34', 5) |
+---------------------+
| 0.00000             |
+---------------------+
1 row in set, 1 warning (0.00 sec)

Warning (Code 1292): Truncated incorrect DOUBLE value: 'q12.34'
```

> - If the first input parameter is a string consisting of digits and non-digits, the function will return a result based on the continuous digits at the front of the parameter. For example, `FORMAT('12.34q56.78', 1)` yields the same result as `FORMAT('12.34', 1)`.

Reviewer 3: Note that a digit can contain `e`.

```
mysql> SELECT FORMAT('1e2', 5);
+------------------+
| FORMAT('1e2', 5) |
+------------------+
| 100.00000        |
+------------------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)
```

- If the second input parameter (number of decimal places) is negative, the function truncates the decimal part and returns an integer.
- If any of the input parameters is `NULL`, the function returns `NULL`.

> Examples:

Reviewer 3: Note that it doesn't only seem to truncate, it also does rounding.
```
mysql> SELECT FORMAT('1.14', 1);
+-------------------+
| FORMAT('1.14', 1) |
+-------------------+
| 1.1               |
+-------------------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)

mysql> SELECT FORMAT('1.15', 1);
+-------------------+
| FORMAT('1.15', 1) |
+-------------------+
| 1.2               |
+-------------------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)
```

Formatting the number 12.34 to different decimal places:

```sql
SELECT FORMAT(12.34, 1);

+------------------+
| FORMAT(12.34, 1) |
+------------------+
| 12.3             |
+------------------+
```

```sql
SELECT FORMAT(12.34, 5);

+------------------+
| FORMAT(12.34, 5) |
+------------------+
| 12.34000         |
+------------------+
```

```sql
SELECT FORMAT(12.34, 2);

+------------------+
| FORMAT(12.34, 2) |
+------------------+
| 12.34            |
+------------------+
```

### [`FROM_BASE64()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/string-functions.html#function_from-base64)

> The `FROM_BASE64()` function is used to decode a string represented in Base-64 encoding, returning its hexadecimal string form.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `FROM_BASE64()` function is used to decode a string represented in Base64 encoding, returning its hexadecimal string form.
```

There seems to be an IETF RFC to standardize Base64: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4648

Reviewer 3: Maybe link to the RFC and/or https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Base64

- This function accepts one parameter: the Base64 encoded string that needs to be decoded.
- If the input parameter is not a valid Base64 encoded string, the `FROM_BASE64()` function will return `NULL`.

> **Note:**
>
> The `FROM_BASE64()` function only processes valid Base64 encoded strings.

Example:

Decoding the Base64 encoded string `'SGVsbG8gVGlEQg=='` (which is the result of encoding `'Hello TiDB'` in Base64).

```sql

> SELECT FROM_BASE64('SGVsbG8gVGlEQg==');

Reviewer 3: Maybe convert the number to a string or use `mysql --skip-binary-as-hex ...` to have the bytes sent to the terminal directly.

```
mysql> SELECT CONVERT(FROM_BASE64('SGVsbG8gVGlEQg==') USING utf8mb4);
+--------------------------------------------------------+
| CONVERT(FROM_BASE64('SGVsbG8gVGlEQg==') USING utf8mb4) |
+--------------------------------------------------------+
| Hello TiDB                                             |
+--------------------------------------------------------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)
```

Reviewer 3: Another option is to use a number.

```
mysql> SELECT TO_BASE64(12345);
+------------------+
| TO_BASE64(12345) |
+------------------+
| MTIzNDU=         |
+------------------+
1 row in set (0.01 sec)

mysql> SELECT FROM_BASE64('MTIzNDU=');
+-------------------------+
| FROM_BASE64('MTIzNDU=') |
+-------------------------+
| 12345                   |
+-------------------------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)
```

Might be good to link or reference `TO_BASE64()`

Author: I appreciate the additional information you've provided! However, when I execute in my environment, it seems that I am getting a different result than yours. I am currently using TiDB v7.5, and my execution result is:

```sql
mysql> SELECT FROM_BASE64('MTIzNDU=');
+--------------------------------------------------+
| FROM_BASE64('MTIzNDU=')                          |
+--------------------------------------------------+
| 0x3132333435                                     |
+--------------------------------------------------+
1 row in set (0.01 sec)
```
